RFC: Styling Handbook for Fluent UI React v9 (#26148)
microsoft/fluentui: rfcs/react-components/styles-handbook.md

    - [Avoid `!important`](#avoid-important)
  - [Performance](#performance)
    - [Avoid nested `mergeClasses` calls](#avoid-nested-mergeclasses-calls)
  - [Nested selectors](#nested-selectors)
    - [Usage with pseudo classes](#usage-with-pseudo-classes)
    - [Do not use selectors to target elements](#do-not-use-selectors-to-target-elements)
    - [Do not introduce complicated selectors](#do-not-introduce-complicated-selectors)
    - [Avoid usage of input pseudo classes](#avoid-usage-of-input-pseudo-classes)
  - [RTL styles](#rtl-styles)
    - [Using `@noflip`](#using-noflip)

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->

# Introduction

Griffel is a hybrid CSS-in-JS that features runtime option like any other CSS-in-JS and [Ahead-of-time compilation][griffel-aot] with [CSS extraction][griffel-css-extraction] to reduce runtime footprint and improve performance.

# Basics

Griffel uses Atomic CSS to generate classes. In Atomic CSS every property-value is written as a single CSS rule.

```css
/* Monolithic classes */
/* Can be applied only to a specific button */
.button {
  display: flex;
  align-items: center;
}

/* Atomic CSS */

> /* Can be applied to any element that needs there rules */

Reviewer: ```suggestion
/* Can be applied to any element that needs these rules */
```

.display-flex {
  display: flex;
}
.align-items-center {
  align-items: center;
}
```

[Learn more][griffel-atomic-css] about Atomic CSS.

# APIs

## `makeStyles`

> Is used to define style permutations in components and is used for style overrides. Returns a [React hook][react-hook] that should be called inside a component:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`makeStyles` function is used to define style permutations in components and is used for style overrides. Returns a [React hook][react-hook] that should be called inside a component:
```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`makeStyles` is used to define style permutations in components and is used for style overrides. Returns a [React hook][react-hook] that should be called inside a component:
```

```jsx

> import { makeStyles } from '@griffel/react';

Reviewer 3: doesn't fluent reexport these? since this guide is in fluent repo, I might expect the import to point to fluent.

Author: @jurokapsiar I added a note 3c10c6a.

const useClasses = makeStyles({
  button: { display: 'flex' },
  icon: { paddingLeft: '5px' },
});
```

> ### Limitations

Reviewer 2: This section really isn't about limitations right? it's more about 'Perforance caveat'

Author: Agreed, renamed in dbe5fd5

> Atomic CSS generates more classes than the approach with monolithic classes. Usually it's not a problem, but there are cases when performance [may degrade][griffel-recalc-performance], for example when elements have more than 100 classes. This does not happen usually as there is a limited set of CSS properties that is applied to a DOM element:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Atomic CSS generates more classes than a standard approach with monolithic classes. Usually it's not a problem, but there are cases when performance [may degrade][griffel-recalc-performance], for example when elements have more than 100 classes. This does not happen usually as there is a limited set of CSS properties that is applied to a DOM element:
```

```js
import { makeStyles, shorthands } from '@griffel/react';

const useClasses = makeStyles({
  root: {
    display: 'flex',
    alignItems: 'center',

>     ...shorthands.padding('4px'),

Reviewer: This is the first time `shorthands` is used.
1. This document expects the reader already understands how to use Griffel. That is fine, but I would just explicitly call it out in Basics chapter as a prerequisite.
2. Even after that, I would add one sentence about shorthands to the Basics as well.

Author: @miroslavstastny that's fair, I added it under limitations for `makeStyles` in fff7339.

  },
});
// ⬇️⬇️⬇️

> // produces 6 classes (1+1+4)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// produces 6 classes (1 + 1 + 4 for expanded padding)
```

```

> > 💡**Tip:** To check generated classes consider to use [Try out][griffel-try-out] sandbox.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> 💡**Tip:** Preview generated classes consider in the [Try out][griffel-try-out] sandbox.
```

> > 💡**Tip:** To check generated classes consider to use [Try out][griffel-try-out] sandbox.

Reviewer: Not related to this PR, but the sandbox renders in unusably small viewport 🔬

> However, the situation can go out of control with nested selectors, [pseudo classes][mdn-pseudo-classes]/selectors and [At-rules][mdn-at-rules] causing "CSS rules explosion":

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, "CSS rules explosion" can happen when using nested selectors, [pseudo classes][mdn-pseudo-classes]/selectors and [At-rules][mdn-at-rules]:
```

```js
import { makeStyles, shorthands } from '@griffel/react';

const useClasses = makeStyles({
  root: {
    ...shorthands.padding('4px'),
    ...shorthands.margin('4px'),

    ':hover': {
      ...shorthands.padding('4px'),
      ...shorthands.margin('4px'),
    },

    '::before': {
      display: 'block',
      content: "' '",
    },

    '@media (forced-colors: active)': {
      ...shorthands.padding('4px'),
      ...shorthands.margin('4px'),
    },
  },
});
// ⬇️⬇️⬇️

> // produces 14 classes ((4+4)+(4+4)+2+(4+4))

Reviewer: That's 26, not 14 😜

```

> Such cases might be unavoidable by design, next section covers APIs to address this problem.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Such cases might be unavoidable by design, the next section covers APIs to address this problem.
```

Reviewer: Also can `the next section` be a link?

Author: @miroslavstastny done in fdbbb10.

## `mergeClasses()`

> Griffel provides [`mergeClasses() API`][griffel-merge-classes] that is expected to be used in cases with styles permutations:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The [`mergeClasses() API`][griffel-merge-classes] is used when multiple Griffel styles are used on the same element.
```

```js
import { makeStyles, shorthands } from '@griffel/react';

const useClasses = makeStyles({
  root: {
    /* styles */
  },
  foo: {
    /* styles */
  },
  bar: {
    /* styles */
  },
});

function Component(props) {
  const classes = useClasses();
  const className = mergeClasses(
    classes.root,
    props.foo && classes.foo /* styles specific for "foo" */,
    props.bar && classes.bar /* styles specific for "bar" */,
  );

  /* --- */
}
```

> ### Do not concatenate classes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Only combine classes with `mergeClasses`
```

It is not possible to simply concatenate classes returned by `useClasses()` hooks. Always use `mergeClasses()` to merge classes as results of concatenation can contain duplicated classes and lead to non-deterministic results.

```js
import { makeStyles, mergeClasses } from '@griffel/react';

const useClasses = makeStyles({
  rootA: { display: 'flex' },
  rootB: { display: 'grid' },
});

function App(props) {
  const classes = useClasses();

  // ✅ Returns "class-display-grid"
  const correctClasses = mergeClasses(classes.rootA, classes.rootB);
  // 🔴 Never concatenate class strings, returns "class-display-flex class-display-grid"
  const wrongClasses = classes.rootA + ' ' + classes.rootB;
}
```

## `makeResetStyles`

> Is used to define base styles in components avoid the "CSS rules explosion" problem as generates a monolithic class:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This API works similarly to `makeStyles` and is used to styles as a single monolithic class to avoid the "CSS rules explosion" problem.
```

```js
import { makeResetStyles } from '@griffel/react';

const useBaseClassname = makeResetStyles({
  padding: '4px',
  margin: '4px',
});
```

> > ⚠️ **Note:** Only one class generated by `makeResetStyles()` can be applied to an element. Otherwise, behavior will be non-deterministic as classes merging will not be done for this case and results depend on order of insertion.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> ⚠️ **Note:** Only one class generated by `makeResetStyles()` can be applied to an element. Otherwise, behavior will be non-deterministic since styles are not merged and deduplicated, the results will depend on order of insertion.
```

> ### Hybrid approach

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Hybrid approach (Using `makeStyles` and `makeResetStyles` together)
```

> Our recommendation is use [`makeResetStyles` API][griffel-make-reset-styles] to define base styles for a component and keep using `makeStyles` for overrides and permutations:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We recommend using [`makeResetStyles` API][griffel-make-reset-styles] to define the base styles for a component and use `makeStyles` to override or enhance the base styles at runtime:
```

```jsx
import { makeStyles, makeResetStyles, mergeClasses, shorthands } from '@griffel/react';

const useBaseClassname = makeResetStyles({
  ':hover': {
    ...shorthands.padding('4px'),
    /* other styles */
  },
  '::before': {
    display: 'block',
    content: "' '",
  },
  '@media (forced-colors: active)': {
    ...shorthands.padding('4px'),
    /* other styles */
  },
});
// ⬇️⬇️⬇️
// produces 1 class

const useClasses = makeStyles({
  circular: {
    ...shorthands.borderRadius('10px'),
  },
  primary: {
    color: 'pink',
  },
});
// ⬇️⬇️⬇️
// produces 4/1 classes to be conditionally applied

function Component(props) {
  const baseClassName = useBaseClassname();
  const classes = useClasses();

  const className = mergeClasses(baseClassName, props.circular && classes.circular, props.primary && classes.primary);

  return <div className={className} />;
}
```

> # Advanced

Reviewer 2: Is there really a distinction between basic and advanced? and it's kinda weird to have this order:

* basic
* API
* advanced

I think we should combine basic and advance to be something like 'core concepts'

Reviewer: I would remove Advanced. What's in the chapter is important for the engineers to understand.

Author: @ling1726 @miroslavstastny 

There is a problem between there:
- we need to explain what is Atomic CSS, so a reader will know why we are counting classes
- we need to introduce APIs
- and then we can explain selectors

I was thinking that to do with that and tried to do following (a6b2c35), WDYT?

- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [Core concepts](#core-concepts)
  - [Atomic CSS](#atomic-css)
  - [`makeStyles`](#makestyles)
    - [Limitations](#limitations)
    - [Performance caveat](#performance-caveat)
  - [`mergeClasses()`](#mergeclasses)
    - [⚠️ Only combine classes with `mergeClasses`](#%EF%B8%8F-only-combine-classes-with-mergeclasses)
  - [`makeResetStyles`](#makeresetstyles)
    - [Hybrid approach (Using `makeStyles` and `makeResetStyles` together)](#hybrid-approach-using-makestyles-and-makeresetstyles-together)
  - [Understanding selector complexity](#understanding-selector-complexity)
- [Best practices](#best-practices)

Reviewer: lgtm!

> ## Understanding selectors complexity

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Understanding selector complexity
```

CSS Selectors are matched by browser engines from [right to left (bottom-up parsing)][stackoverflow-selectors-match]:

```mermaid
flowchart RL
    C[li] --> B[ul] --> A[.menu]
```

```css
.menu ul li {
  color: #00f;
}
```

> The browser first checks for `li`, then `ul`, and then `.menu`.

> It means that we need to understand selectors that we are writing and avoid _wide_ selectors. A component below will be used as an example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It means that we need to understand the selectors that we are writing and avoid _wide_ selectors. Let's use the component below as an example:
```

```jsx
import { makeStyles } from '@griffel/react';

const useClasses = makeStyles({
  test: {
    color: 'orange',

    '> *': {
      color: 'red',
    },
    '> h1': {
      color: 'magenta',
    },
    '> div': {
      color: 'green',
    },
    '> .ui-button': {
      color: 'blue',
    },
  },
});

function App() {
  const classes = useClasses();

  return (
    <>
      <div className={classes.test}>
        <h1>Hello World</h1>
        <button class="ui-button">A button</button>
      </div>

      {/* Renders 500 empty divs */}
      {Array.from({ length: 500 }, (_, i) => (
        <div key={i} />
      ))}
    </>
  );
}
```

#### Measurements

##### No selector (best)

> Matches only an element where is applied.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Only matches the element that the class is applied to.
```

- selector `.fe3e8s9`
- match_attempts **1**
- match_count **1**

##### `> *` (worst)

> "\*" matches any element on a page.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
"\*" matches all elemenst on the page.
```

- selector `.fzbuleu > *`
- match_attempts **502**

> - match_count **1**

Reviewer: The math does not work here for me. There is no `div` inside the `.fzbuleu`, so what is matching? I guess you want to use `div` or `button` both in the `.fzbuleu` and the loop.

Author: I updated stats in 87a9eaa, now it should make sense.

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/14183168/212699716-92455cb2-5cb2-4ac2-a6ad-6a0874235ab4.png)

It matches inner `button` and `h1`:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/14183168/212700071-7d8fcd8f-e66f-41c6-972f-3ec8af99b5a2.png)

If you want to play with it: https://codesandbox.io/s/thirsty-haslett-kqfj87

##### `> h1` & `> div` (non ideal)

Targets all `h1` & `div` tags.

- selector `.fohk16y > h1`
- match_attempts **1**
- match_count **1**

> In this example performs better as page has a single `h1` tag, this will not be a case in the real app that it is visible on the next example with `div`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The performance in this example is acceptable because the page only has a single `h1` tag, this will not be a case in a real app. The performance problem is more obvious here with the `div` selector.
```

Reviewer: I wanted to suggest to split this to two sentences as well as the second sentence is the whole message of the chapter.

- selector `.fq4d7o6 > div`
- match_attempts **501**
- match_count **1**

#### Targeting a classname (better)

> The most effective out there as we target only elements with a specific classname. However, it will not save from the case with 1k buttons in the app.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The most effective since we only target elements with a specific class. However, this is still not optimal if there are 1000 elements with the class `ui-button` on the page.
```

- selector `.fqhvij7 > .ui-button`
- match_attempts **1**
- match_count **1**

# Best practices

## Writting styles

### Use `tokens` over direct colors

> Fluent UI React v9 provides [design tokens][fluent-colors] to provide consistent way of theming via `tokens` provided by `@fluentui/react-theme`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Fluent UI React v9 provides [design tokens][fluent-colors] for consistent theming.
```

```js
import { makeStyles } from '@griffel/react';
import { tokens } from '@fluentui/react-theme';

const useClasses = makeStyles({
  // ❌ Don't do
  rootA: { color: 'red' /* brand foreground */ },
  // ✅ Do
  rootB: { color: tokens.colorBrandForeground1 },
});
```

> Exact colors should be never used in Fluent UI code and are not recommended by be used in applications. The exception are [system-colors][mdn-system-colors] used by forced colors mode:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Exact colors should be never used in Fluent UI code and and we do not recommend their use in applications either. The exception are [system-colors][mdn-system-colors] used by forced colors mode:
```

> Exact colors should be never used in Fluent UI code and are not recommended by be used in applications. The exception are [system-colors][mdn-system-colors] used by forced colors mode:

Reviewer: re system-colors? would you expect those to be ever used outside of HC media queries?

Author: @miroslavstastny it's a good call, added a clarification in parens and also updated the example (82fe5be).

```js
import { makeStyles } from '@griffel/react';

const useClasses = makeStyles({
  button: { color: 'ButtonText' },
});
```

> ### Avoid duplication in rule definitions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Avoid rule duplication
```

Styles written for components should follow these rules:

> - base styles should contain the most of CSS definitions that are applicable to base state

Reviewer: + Use `makeResetStyles` for base component styles

> - base styles should contain the most of CSS definitions that are applicable to base state
> - styles for permutations should be granular and don't contain definitions that are present in base styles

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- base styles should contain the most of CSS definitions that are applicable to base state
- styles for permutations should be granular
- base styles should not be duplicated by permutations
```

```js
import { makeStyles, mergeClasses, shorthands } from '@griffel/react';
import { tokens } from '@fluentui/react-theme';

const useClasses = makeStyles({

>   base: {

Reviewer 2: should we be consistently using `makeResetStyles` for these examples for base styles?

Author: We should, done in 9e9d2e4

    display: 'flex',
    color: tokens.colorNeutralForeground1,
    ...shorthands.padding('10px'),
  },
  // ❌ Don't do
  //  "display" & "padding" with the same values are defined in base styles
  primary: {
    display: 'flex',
    ...shorthands.padding('10px'),
    backgroundColor: tokens.colorBrandBackground,
    color: tokens.colorBrandForeground1,
  },
  // ✅ Do
  primary: {
    backgroundColor: tokens.colorBrandBackground,
    color: tokens.colorBrandForeground1,
  },
});

function App(props) {
  const classes = useClasses();
  const className = mergeClasses(classes.base, props.primary && classes.primary);

  /* --- */
}
```

### Avoid `!important`

> Our styles are written in way to allow predictable and simple style overrides, `!important` should not be used in styles:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Our styles are written in way to allow predictable and simple style overrides, `!important` should not be necessary to override any styles:
```

```js
import { makeStyles, mergeClasses, shorthands } from '@griffel/react';

> const useClasses = makeStyles({

Reviewer 2: This example could be better, maybe let's do an example of how overrides work (i.e. based on application order... perhaps this could be in `basics` section too

  base: {
    // ❌ Don't do
    display: 'flex !important',
  },
});
```

## Performance

> ### Avoid nested `mergeClasses` calls

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Use `mergeClasses` once for an element
```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Avoid multiple `mergeClasses` calls
```

`mergeClasses` is a performant function, however it's not expected that it will be called multiple times for the same element.

```js
// ❌ Don't do
function Component(props) {
  const classes = useClasses();

  const classesForFoo = mergeClasses(/* ---- */);
  const className = mergeClasses(classes.root, classesForFoo, mergeClasses(/* ---- */), mergeClasses(/* ---- */));

  /* --- */
}
```

> Conditions to apply styles might be complex, in this case consider to extract them to separate variables:

Reviewer 2: exctracting coniditions to separate variables should be it's own section IMO, maybe also with tricks like

```ts
makeStyesl({
  small: {},
  medium: {},
  large: {},
})

mergeClasses(styes[props.size]);
```

something like 'structure your conditional styles'

Author: Good idea, added in ddbdb92.

```js
// ✅ Do
function Component(props) {
  const classes = useClasses();

  const conditionForFoo = /* ---- */ true;
  const className = mergeClasses(classes.root, conditionForFoo && classes.foo /* other condition */);

  /* --- */
}
```

## Nested selectors

> Nested selectors in styles should be used responsibly as they can cause "CSS rules explosion" problem.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use nested selectors responsibly in styles because they can cause "CSS rules explosion".
```

> ### Usage with pseudo classes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Use nested selectors with pseudo classes
```

> ### Usage with pseudo classes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Use nested selectors with pseudo classes
```

Use nested selectors when they are combined with pseudo classes:

```js
import { makeStyles, mergeClasses, shorthands } from '@griffel/react';
import { tokens } from '@fluentui/react-theme';

const useClasses = makeStyles({
  base: {
    // ✅ Do
    // Shows filled icon on hover
    ':hover': {
      [`& .${iconFilledClassName}`]: {
        display: 'inline',
      },
      [`& .${iconRegularClassName}`]: {
        display: 'none',
      },
    },
  },
});
```

> ### Do not use selectors to target elements

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Apply classes directly to elements
```

> Do not use nested selectors to target slots or nested elements that are accessible directly:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Do not use nested selectors to target an element or slot if you can apply classes on directly on it.
```

```jsx
import { makeStyles, mergeClasses, shorthands } from '@griffel/react';
import { tokens } from '@fluentui/react-theme';

const useClasses = makeStyles({
  root: {
    backgroundColor: tokens.colorNeutralBackground1,
    // ❌ Don't do
    // You can apply classes directly to that "div"
    '> div': {
      color: tokens.colorNeutralForeground1,
    },
  },

  // ✅ Do
  root: {
    backgroundColor: tokens.colorNeutralBackground1,
  },
  slot: {
    color: tokens.colorNeutralForeground1,
  },
});

function App(props) {
  const classes = useClasses();

  return (
    <div className={classes.root}>
      {/* 💡 Classes can be passed directly to this element */}
      <div className={classes.slot} />
    </div>
  );
}
```

> ### Do not introduce complicated selectors

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Do not use complicated selectors
```

> Keep selectors simple to produce reusable CSS rules:

Reviewer 2: let's lso add that complicated selectors are hard to override

Author: Added in 18de44f.

  .hash .some-unique-class {
    display: flex;
  }
  ```
- Complicated selectors produce bigger bundle size with AOT

  ```js
  makeStyles({
    rootA: {
      display: 'flex',
    },
    rootB: {
      '> .some-classname': {
        '> .other-classname': {
          display: 'flex',
          alignItems: 'center',
        },
      },
    },
  });
  ```

  ⬇️⬇️⬇️

  ```css
  /* ✅ no selectors */
  .f22iagw {
    display: flex;
  }

  /* ⚠️ with complex selectors */
  .f1312jvm > .some-classname > .other-classname {
    display: flex;
  }
  .f1c58nry > .some-classname > .other-classname {
    align-items: center;
  }
  ```

```js
import { makeStyles, mergeClasses, shorthands } from '@griffel/react';
import { tokens } from '@fluentui/react-theme';

const useClasses = makeStyles({
  root: {
    // ❌ Don't do
    // Avoid complex selectors i.e. simplify them
    '> .foo-classname': {
      '> .bar-classname': {
        '> .baz-classname': {
          display: 'flex',
          alignItems: 'center',
        },
      },
    },
  },

  // ✅ Do
  // Apply classes directly to an element
  baz: {
    display: 'flex',
    alignItems: 'center',
  },
});
```

> ### Avoid usage of input pseudo classes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Avoid input pseudo classes
```

Instead of usage [input pseudo classes][mdn-input-pseudo-classes] in styles, prefer to use JS state.

- Produces less classes on an element
- Selectors for overrides are simpler

> - These pseudo classes are supported only on input elements

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- These pseudo classes are supported by input elements
```

  root: {
    color: tokens.colorNeutralForeground1,
    // ❌ Don't do
    ':checked': {
      color: tokens.colorNeutralForeground2,
    },
  },

  // ✅ Do
  root: {
    color: tokens.colorNeutralForeground1,
  },
  checked: {
    color: tokens.colorNeutralForeground2,
  },
});

function Checkbox(props) {
  const [checked, setChecked] = React.useState();
  const classes = useClasses();

  return <input className={mergeClasses(classes.root, checked && classes.checked)} checked={checked} />;
}
```

## RTL styles

Griffel performs automatic flipping of properties and values in Right-To-Left (RTL) text direction.

```js
import { makeStyles } from '@griffel/react';

const useClasses = makeStyles({
  root: {
    paddingLeft: '10px',
  },
});
```

⬇️⬇️⬇️

```css
/* Will be applied in LTR */
.frdkuqy {
  padding-left: 10px;
}
/* Will be applied in RTL */
.f81rol6 {
  padding-right: 10px;
}
```

Values than contain CSS variables (or our `tokens`) might not be always converted, for example:

```js
import { makeStyles } from '@griffel/react';

const useClasses = makeStyles({
  root: {
    // ⚠️ "boxShadow" will not be flipped in this example
    boxShadow: 'var(--box-shadow)',
  },
});
```

> In this case, please define own styles and get a direction from `useFluent()` hook:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this case, please apply your own styles with the text direction from the `useFluent()` hook:
```

```js
import { makeStyles } from '@griffel/react';

const useClasses = makeStyles({
  root: {
    boxShadow: 'var(--box-shadow)',
  },
  rtl: {
    boxShadow: 'var(--box-shadow-in-rtl)',
  },
});

function App() {
  const classes = useClasses();
  const { dir } = useFluent();
  const className = mergeClasses(classes.root, dir === 'rtl' && classes.rtl);

  /* --- */
}
```

### Using `@noflip`

You can also control which rules you don't want to flip by adding a `/* @noflip */` CSS comment to your rule:

```js
import { makeStyles } from '@griffel/react';

const useClasses = makeStyles({
  root: {
    paddingLeft: '10px /* @noflip */',
  },
});
```

⬇️⬇️⬇️

```css
/* Will be applied in LTR & RTL */
.f6x5cb6 {
  padding-left: 10px;
}
```

> This is useful to define direction specific animations:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This can be useful to define direction specific animations:
```

```js
import { makeStyles, shorthands } from '@griffel/react';

const useClasses = makeStyles({
  root: {
    display: 'flex',
    alignItems: 'center',
    ...shorthands.padding('4px'),
  },
});
// ⬇️⬇️⬇️
// produces 6 classes (1+1+4)
```

> 💡**Tip:** Preview generated classes consider in the [Try out][griffel-try-out] sandbox.

However, "CSS rule explosion" can happen when using nested selectors, [pseudo classes][mdn-pseudo-classes]/selectors and [At-rules][mdn-at-rules]:

```js
import { makeStyles, shorthands } from '@griffel/react';

const useClasses = makeStyles({
  root: {
    ...shorthands.padding('4px'),
    ...shorthands.margin('4px'),

    ':hover': {
      ...shorthands.padding('4px'),
      ...shorthands.margin('4px'),
    },

    '::before': {
      display: 'block',
      content: "' '",
    },

    '@media (forced-colors: active)': {
      ...shorthands.padding('4px'),
      ...shorthands.margin('4px'),
    },
  },
});
// ⬇️⬇️⬇️

> // produces 14 classes ((4+4)+(4+4)+2+(4+4))

Author: ```suggestion
// produces 26 classes ((4+4)+(4+4)+2+(4+4))
```

@miroslavstastny eagle eye 🦅 Initially the example was simpler, but I decided to highlight the problem more.

  const wrongClasses = classes.rootA + ' ' + classes.rootB;
}
```

## `makeResetStyles`

This API works similarly to `makeStyles` and is used to styles as a single monolithic class to avoid the "CSS rules explosion" problem.

```js
import { makeResetStyles } from '@griffel/react';

const useBaseClassname = makeResetStyles({
  padding: '4px',
  margin: '4px',
});
```

> ⚠️ **Note:** Only one class generated by `makeResetStyles()` can be applied to an element. Otherwise, behavior will be non-deterministic since styles are not merged and deduplicated, the results will depend on order of insertion.

### Hybrid approach (Using `makeStyles` and `makeResetStyles` together)

We recommend using [`makeResetStyles` API][griffel-make-reset-styles] to define the base styles for a component and use `makeStyles` to override or enhance the base styles at runtime:

```jsx
import { makeStyles, makeResetStyles, mergeClasses, shorthands } from '@griffel/react';

const useBaseClassname = makeResetStyles({
  ':hover': {
    ...shorthands.padding('4px'),
    /* other styles */
  },
  '::before': {
    display: 'block',
    content: "' '",
  },
  '@media (forced-colors: active)': {

>     ...shorthands.padding('4px'),

Reviewer 4: Is expanding shorthand in makeResetStyles a wasted work?
```suggestion
    padding: '4px',
```

Author: > Is expanding shorthand in makeResetStyles a wasted work?

Indeed, thanks 👍

    /* other styles */
  },
});
// ⬇️⬇️⬇️
// produces 1 class

const useClasses = makeStyles({
  circular: {
    ...shorthands.borderRadius('10px'),
  },
  primary: {
    color: 'pink',
  },
});
// ⬇️⬇️⬇️
// produces 4/1 classes to be conditionally applied

function Component(props) {
  const baseClassName = useBaseClassname();
  const classes = useClasses();

  const className = mergeClasses(baseClassName, props.circular && classes.circular, props.primary && classes.primary);

  return <div className={className} />;
}
```

## RTL styles

`makeStyles` & `makeResetStyles` perform automatic flipping of properties and values in Right-To-Left (RTL) text direction.

```js
import { makeStyles } from '@griffel/react';

const useClasses = makeStyles({
  root: {
    paddingLeft: '10px',
  },
});
```

⬇️⬇️⬇️

```css
/* Will be applied in LTR */
.frdkuqy {
  padding-left: 10px;
}
/* Will be applied in RTL */
.f81rol6 {
  padding-right: 10px;
}
```

### CSS variables caveat

> Values than contain CSS variables (or our `tokens`) might not be always converted, for example:

Reviewer 4: nit:
```suggestion
Values that contain CSS variables (or our `tokens`) might not be always converted, for example:
```

- selector `.fq4d7o6 > div`
- match_attempts **501**
- match_count **1**

#### Targeting a classname (better)

This kind of selectors may not be the most efficient for pages with 1000 elements of the class 'ui-button', but it is the most effective as it targets only elements with that specific class.

- selector `.fqhvij7 > .ui-button`
- match_attempts **1**
- match_count **1**

It is recommended to use this method in situations where pseudo selectors or pseudo classes are used, for example:

```js
import { makeStyles } from '@griffel/react';

const useClasses = makeStyles({
  test: {
    ':hover': {
      '> .ui-button': {
        color: 'blue',
      },
    },
  },
});
```

# Best practices

## Writing styles

### Use `tokens` over direct colors

Fluent UI React v9 provides [design tokens][fluent-colors] for consistent theming.

```js
import { makeStyles } from '@griffel/react';
import { tokens } from '@fluentui/react-theme';

const useClasses = makeStyles({
  // ❌ Don't do
  rootA: { color: 'red' /* brand foreground */ },
  // ✅ Do
  rootB: { color: tokens.colorBrandForeground1 },
});
```

> Exact colors should be never used in Fluent UI code and we do not recommend their use in applications either. The exception are [system-colors][mdn-system-colors] used by forced colors mode (inside media queries):

Reviewer 4: nit:
```suggestion
Exact colors should be never used in Fluent UI code and we do not recommend their use in applications either. The exception is [system-colors][mdn-system-colors] used by forced colors mode (inside media queries):
```

    </div>
  );
}
```

### Avoid complicated selectors

Keep selectors simple to produce reusable CSS rules:

- CSS rules that are unique cannot be reused in other areas
  ```css
  /*    ⬇️ cannot be reused in other components  */
  .hash .some-unique-class {
    display: flex;
  }
  ```
- Complicated selectors produce bigger bundle size with AOT

  ```js
  makeStyles({
    rootA: {
      display: 'flex',
    },
    rootB: {
      '> .some-classname': {
        '> .other-classname': {
          display: 'flex',
          alignItems: 'center',
        },
      },
    },
  });
  ```

  ⬇️⬇️⬇️

  ```css
  /* ✅ no selectors */
  .f22iagw {
    display: flex;
  }

  /* ⚠️ with complex selectors */
  .f1312jvm > .some-classname > .other-classname {
    display: flex;
  }
  .f1c58nry > .some-classname > .other-classname {
    align-items: center;
  }
  ```

- Complicated selectors are hard to override as overrides should match component's styles

  ```js
  // On component side
  makeResetStyles({
    '> .some-classname': {
      '> .other-classname': {
        ':hover': {
          display: 'flex',
          alignItems: 'center',
        },
      },
    },
  });

>   // On consumer side 💥

Reviewer 4: What does `// On consumer side 💥` mean? Does it mean:
`'> .some-classname > .other-classname:hover'` works but it's hard for consumer to guess it
or
`'> .some-classname > .other-classname:hover'` doesn't work because it doesn't match the structure on component side

Author: > works but it's hard for consumer to guess it

Great callout 👍 I updated the comment in d6a7704

  makeStyles({
    foo: {
      '> .some-classname > .other-classname:hover': {
        display: 'flex',
        alignItems: 'center',
      },
    },
  });
  ```

```js
import { makeStyles, makeResetStyles, mergeClasses, shorthands } from '@griffel/react';
import { tokens } from '@fluentui/react-theme';

// ❌ Don't do
// Avoid complex selectors i.e. simplify them
const useBaseClassName = makeResetStyles({
  '> .foo-classname': {
    '> .bar-classname': {
      '> .baz-classname': {
        display: 'flex',
        alignItems: 'center',
      },
    },
  },
});

// ✅ Do
// Apply classes directly to an element
const useBaseBazClasses = makeResetStyles({
  display: 'flex',
  alignItems: 'center',
});
```

### Avoid input pseudo classes

Instead of usage [input pseudo classes][mdn-input-pseudo-classes] in styles, prefer to use JS state.

- Produces less classes on an element
- Selectors for overrides are simpler

> - These pseudo classes are supported by input elements

Reviewer 4: I get the point in L866 and L867. Not sure what L868 has anything to do with the point of preferring js state over pseudo class?

Author: I missed "only" there, it should be "These pseudo classes are only supported by input elements"

# Introduction

Griffel is a hybrid CSS-in-JS that features runtime option like any other CSS-in-JS and [Ahead-of-time compilation][griffel-aot] with [CSS extraction][griffel-css-extraction] to reduce runtime footprint and improve performance.

# Core concepts

## Atomic CSS

Griffel uses Atomic CSS to generate classes. In Atomic CSS every property-value is written as a single CSS rule.

```css
/* Monolithic classes */
/* Can be applied only to a specific button */
.button {
  display: flex;
  align-items: center;
}

/* Atomic CSS */
/* Can be applied to any element that needs these rules */
.display-flex {
  display: flex;
}
.align-items-center {
  align-items: center;
}
```

[Learn more][griffel-atomic-css] about Atomic CSS.

> 💡 **Note:** All examples in this document use `@griffel/react` package. However, if you're a Fluent UI consumer please use `@fluentui/react-components` in imports.

## `makeStyles`

`makeStyles` is used to define style permutations in components and is used for style overrides. Returns a [React hook][react-hook] that should be called inside a component:

```js
import { makeStyles } from '@griffel/react';

> const useClasses = makeStyles({

Reviewer 5: Might be nice to show the usage for `useClasses` in this example.

```tsx
const classes = useClasses();

<button className={classes.button} //...
```

This usage is shown in the `mergeClasses` section but it seems to be this is part of the `makeStyles` API.

Author: Great idea, updated in d9ba1ba.

  button: { display: 'flex' },
  icon: { paddingLeft: '5px' },
});
```

### Limitations

`makeStyles()` does not support [CSS shorthands][griffel-css-shorthands-support] in styles definitions. However, Griffel provides a set of [`shorthands` functions][griffel-css-shorthands] to mimic them:

```js
import { makeStyles, shorthands } from '@griffel/react';

const useClasses = makeStyles({
  root: {
    // ❌ This is not supported, TypeScript compiler will throw, styles will not be inserted to DOM
    padding: '2px 4px 8px 16px',
    // ✅ Use shorthand functions to avoid writting CSS longhands
    ...shorthands.padding('2px', '4px', '8px', '16px'),
  },
});
```

> > 💡 **Note:** The most of the functions follow syntax in matching CSS properties, but each value should a separate argument:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
> 💡 **Note:** Most of the functions follow syntax matching CSS properties, but each value should a separate argument:
```

```js
// ❌ Will produce wrong results:
//   {
//     paddingBottom: "2px 4px"
//     paddingLeft: "2px 4px"
//     paddingRight: "2px 4px"
//     paddingTop: "2px 4px"
//   }
shorthands.padding('2px 4px');
// ✅ Correct output:
//   {
//     paddingBottom: "2px"
//     paddingLeft: "4px"
//     paddingRight: "4px"
//     paddingTop: "2px"
//   }
shorthands.padding('2px', '4px');
```

### Performance caveat

Atomic CSS generates more classes than a standard approach with monolithic classes. Usually it's not a problem, but there are cases when performance [may degrade][griffel-recalc-performance], for example when elements have more than 100 classes. This does not happen usually as there are only a limited number of CSS properties that can be applied to a DOM element:

```js
import { makeStyles, shorthands } from '@griffel/react';

const useClasses = makeStyles({
  root: {
    display: 'flex',
    alignItems: 'center',
    ...shorthands.padding('4px'),
  },
});
// ⬇️⬇️⬇️
// produces 6 classes (1 + 1 + 4 for expanded padding)
```

> > 💡**Tip:** Preview generated classes consider in the [Try out][griffel-try-out] sandbox.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
> 💡**Tip:** Preview generated classes in the [Try out][griffel-try-out] sandbox.
```

const useClasses = makeStyles({
  blue: { color: 'blue' },
  red: { color: 'red' },
});

function Component(props) {
  // ℹ️ Order of arguments determines the results

  const redClassName = mergeClasses(classes.blue, classes.red);
  // 👆 { color: 'red' }
  const blueClassName = mergeClasses(classes.red, classes.blue);
  // 👆 { color: 'blue' }

  /* --- */
}
```

### ⚠️ Only combine classes with `mergeClasses`

It is not possible to simply concatenate classes returned by `useClasses()` hooks. Always use `mergeClasses()` to merge classes as results of concatenation can contain duplicated classes and lead to non-deterministic results.

```js
import { makeStyles, mergeClasses } from '@griffel/react';

const useClasses = makeStyles({
  rootA: { display: 'flex' },
  rootB: { display: 'grid' },
});

function App(props) {
  const classes = useClasses();

  // ✅ Returns "class-display-grid"
  const correctClasses = mergeClasses(classes.rootA, classes.rootB);
  // 🔴 Never concatenate class strings, returns "class-display-flex class-display-grid"
  const wrongClasses = classes.rootA + ' ' + classes.rootB;
}
```

## `makeResetStyles`

> This API works similarly to `makeStyles` and is used to styles as a single monolithic class to avoid the "CSS rules explosion" problem.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
This API works similarly to `makeStyles` and is used to generate styles as a single monolithic class to avoid the "CSS rules explosion" problem.
```

### Hybrid approach (Using `makeStyles` and `makeResetStyles` together)

We recommend using [`makeResetStyles` API][griffel-make-reset-styles] to define the base styles for a component and use `makeStyles` to override or enhance the base styles at runtime:

```jsx
import { makeStyles, makeResetStyles, mergeClasses, shorthands } from '@griffel/react';

const useBaseClassname = makeResetStyles({
  ':hover': {
    padding: '4px',
    /* other styles */
  },
  '::before': {
    display: 'block',
    content: "' '",
  },
  '@media (forced-colors: active)': {
    padding: '4px',
    /* other styles */
  },
});
// ⬇️⬇️⬇️
// produces 1 class

const useClasses = makeStyles({
  circular: {
    ...shorthands.borderRadius('10px'),
  },
  primary: {
    color: 'pink',
  },
});
// ⬇️⬇️⬇️
// produces 4/1 classes to be conditionally applied

function Component(props) {
  const baseClassName = useBaseClassname();
  const classes = useClasses();

  const className = mergeClasses(baseClassName, props.circular && classes.circular, props.primary && classes.primary);

  return <div className={className} />;
}
```

> ## RTL styles

Author: Mentioned it below (d8e8c28), is it clear now?

- selector `.fq4d7o6 > div`
- match_attempts **501**
- match_count **1**

#### Targeting a classname (better)

This kind of selectors may not be the most efficient for pages with 1000 elements of the class 'ui-button', but it is the most effective as it targets only elements with that specific class.

- selector `.fqhvij7 > .ui-button`
- match_attempts **1**
- match_count **1**

It is recommended to use this method in situations where pseudo selectors or pseudo classes are used, for example:

```js
import { makeStyles } from '@griffel/react';

const useClasses = makeStyles({
  test: {
    ':hover': {
      '> .ui-button': {
        color: 'blue',
      },
    },
  },
});
```

# Best practices

## Writing styles

### Use `tokens` over direct colors

Fluent UI React v9 provides [design tokens][fluent-colors] for consistent theming.

```js
import { makeStyles } from '@griffel/react';
import { tokens } from '@fluentui/react-theme';

const useClasses = makeStyles({
  // ❌ Don't do
  rootA: { color: 'red' /* brand foreground */ },
  // ✅ Do
  rootB: { color: tokens.colorBrandForeground1 },
});
```

> Exact colors should be never used in Fluent UI code and we do not recommend their use in applications either. The exception is [system-colors][mdn-system-colors] used by forced colors mode (inside media queries):

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Exact colors should never be used in Fluent UI code and we do not recommend their use in applications either. The exception is [system-colors][mdn-system-colors] used by forced colors mode (inside media queries):
```

```js
import { makeStyles, makeResetStyles, mergeClasses, shorthands } from '@griffel/react';

const useBaseClassName = makeResetStyles({
  display: 'flex',
  fontSize: '16px',
});
const useClasses = makeStyles({
  small: { fontSize: '12px' },
  medium: {
    /* defined in base styles */
  },
  large: { fontSize: '20px' },
});

function Component(props) {
  const baseClassName = useBaseClassName();
  const classes = useClasses();

  const className = mergeClasses(baseClassName, classes[props.size]);

  /* --- */
}
```

## Performance

### Use `mergeClasses` once for an element

`mergeClasses` is a performant function, however it's not expected that it will be called multiple times for the same element.

```js
// ❌ Don't do
function Component(props) {
  const baseClassName = useBaseClassName();
  const classes = useClasses();

  const classesForFoo = mergeClasses(/* ---- */);
  const className = mergeClasses(baseClassName, classesForFoo, mergeClasses(/* ---- */), mergeClasses(/* ---- */));

  /* --- */
}
```

> Conditions to apply styles might be complex, in this case consider to extract them to separate variables:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Conditions to apply styles might be complex, in this case consider extracting them to separate variables:
```

```js
// ✅ Do
function Component(props) {
  const baseClassName = useBaseClassName();
  const classes = useClasses();

  const conditionForFoo = /* ---- */ true;
  const className = mergeClasses(baseClassName, conditionForFoo && classes.foo /* other condition */);

  /* --- */
}
```

### Avoid unnecessary RTL transforms by using `@noflip`

> You can also control which rules you don't want to flip by adding a `/* @noflip */` CSS comment to your rule:

Reviewer 5: Can `@noflip` be used with `shorthands`?

}
```

This can be useful to define direction specific animations:

```js
import { makeStyles } from '@griffel/react';

const useClasses = makeStyles({
  ltr: {
    animationName: {
      '0%': { left: '0% /* @noflip */' },
      '100%': { left: '100% /* @noflip */' },
    },
  },
  rtl: {
    animationName: {
      '100%': { right: '-100% /* @noflip */' },
      '0%': { right: '100% /* @noflip */' },
    },
  },
});
```

In this case automatic flipping is disabled and will produce less CSS: 2 classes instead of 4.

## Nested selectors

Use nested selectors responsibly in styles because they can cause "CSS rule explosion".

### Use nested selectors with pseudo classes

Use nested selectors when they are combined with pseudo classes:

```js
import { makeResetStyles, mergeClasses, shorthands } from '@griffel/react';
import { tokens } from '@fluentui/react-theme';

const useBaseClassName = makeResetStyles({
  base: {
    // ✅ Do
    // Shows filled icon on hover
    ':hover': {
      [`& .${iconFilledClassName}`]: {
        display: 'inline',
      },
      [`& .${iconRegularClassName}`]: {
        display: 'none',
      },
    },
  },
});
```

### Apply classes directly to elements

> Do not use nested selectors to target an element or slot if you can apply classes on directly on it.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Do not use nested selectors to target an element or slot if you can apply classes directly on it.
```

```jsx
import { makeStyles, mergeClasses, shorthands } from '@griffel/react';
import { tokens } from '@fluentui/react-theme';

const useClasses = makeStyles({
  slotA: {
    backgroundColor: tokens.colorNeutralBackground1,
    // ❌ Don't do
    // You can apply classes directly to that "div"
    '> div': {
      color: tokens.colorNeutralForeground1,
    },
  },

  // ✅ Do
  slotA: {
    backgroundColor: tokens.colorNeutralBackground1,
  },
  slotB: {
    color: tokens.colorNeutralForeground1,
  },
});

function App(props) {
  const classes = useClasses();

  return (

>     <div className={classes.root}>
>       {/* 💡 Classes can be passed directly to this element */}
>       <div className={classes.slot} />

Reviewer 6: These should be `slotA` and `slotB`.

```suggestion
    <div className={classes.slotA}>
      {/* 💡 Classes can be passed directly to this element */}
      <div className={classes.slotB} />
```
